# 4.12 inotify
***

&emsp;&emsp;
inotify 可以用于监控文件以及目录的变化，下面是 inotify 提供的 API：

    #include <sys/inotify.h>
    
    // inotify_init1(0);
    int inotify_init(void); 
    
    // IN_NONBLOCK   在访问事件时使用阻塞读取
    // IN_CLOEXEC    在 exec 时候关闭
    // return a new file descriptor
    int inotify_init1(int flags);

    // pathname      需要监控的文件或者是目录
    // mask          监控标记
    // return a nonnegative watch descriptor
    int inotify_add_watch(int fd, const char *pathname, uint32_t mask);

    int inotify_rm_watch(int fd, int wd);
    
&emsp;&emsp;
整个使用过程非常简单，首先通过 init 创建 fd, 然后将需要监控的文件添加进来或是移除，最后在 read 时读取监控事件。
fd 可以放在 epoll 里进行监控。
监控事件结构如下：

    /* Structure describing an inotify event. */
    struct inotify_event {
      int wd;               /* Watch descriptor. */
      uint32_t mask;        /* Watch mask. */
      uint32_t cookie;      /* Cookie to synchronize two events. */
      uint32_t len;         /* Length (including NULs) of name. */
      char name __flexarr;  /* Name. */
    };
    
&emsp;&emsp;
\_\_flexarr 这个字段是一个悬挂指针，表示文件名称，文件长度通过 len 表示，所以读取一个 event 之后还需要向前移动 len 个字节才能读取下一个事件。

&emsp;&emsp;
有下面这些事件可以进行监控。
下面是代码：

    /* Supported events suitable for MASK parameter of INOTIFY_ADD_WATCH.  */
    #define IN_ACCESS        0x00000001     /* File was accessed.  */
    #define IN_MODIFY        0x00000002     /* File was modified.  */
    #define IN_ATTRIB        0x00000004     /* Metadata changed.  */
    #define IN_CLOSE_WRITE   0x00000008     /* Writtable file was closed.  */
    #define IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE 0x00000010     /* Unwrittable file closed.  */
    #define IN_CLOSE         (IN_CLOSE_WRITE | IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE) /* Close.  */
    #define IN_OPEN          0x00000020     /* File was opened.  */
    #define IN_MOVED_FROM    0x00000040     /* File was moved from X.  */
    #define IN_MOVED_TO      0x00000080     /* File was moved to Y.  */
    #define IN_MOVE          (IN_MOVED_FROM | IN_MOVED_TO) /* Moves.  */
    #define IN_CREATE        0x00000100     /* Subfile was created.  */
    #define IN_DELETE        0x00000200     /* Subfile was deleted.  */
    #define IN_DELETE_SELF   0x00000400     /* Self was deleted.  */
    #define IN_MOVE_SELF     0x00000800     /* Self was moved.  */
    
    /* Events sent by the kernel.  */
    #define IN_UNMOUNT       0x00002000     /* Backing fs was unmounted.  */
    #define IN_Q_OVERFLOW    0x00004000     /* Event queued overflowed.  */
    #define IN_IGNORED       0x00008000     /* File was ignored.  */
    
    /* Helper events.  */
    #define IN_CLOSE         (IN_CLOSE_WRITE | IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE)    /* Close.  */
    #define IN_MOVE          (IN_MOVED_FROM | IN_MOVED_TO)          /* Moves.  */
    
    /* Special flags.  */
    #define IN_ONLYDIR       0x01000000     /* Only watch the path if it is a
                                               directory.  */
    #define IN_DONT_FOLLOW   0x02000000     /* Do not follow a sym link.  */
    #define IN_EXCL_UNLINK   0x04000000     /* Exclude events on unlinked
                                               objects.  */
    #define IN_MASK_ADD      0x20000000     /* Add to the mask of an already
                                               existing watch.  */
    #define IN_ISDIR         0x40000000     /* Event occurred against dir.  */
    #define IN_ONESHOT       0x80000000     /* Only send event once.  */
    
    /* All events which a program can wait on.  */
    #define IN_ALL_EVENTS    (IN_ACCESS | IN_MODIFY | IN_ATTRIB | IN_CLOSE_WRITE  \
                              | IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE | IN_OPEN | IN_MOVED_FROM        \
                              | IN_MOVED_TO | IN_CREATE | IN_DELETE               \
                              | IN_DELETE_SELF | IN_MOVE_SELF)
                              
&emsp;&emsp;                         
man 里对于每个事件有详细说明：

    inotify events
        The  inotify_add_watch(2) mask argument and the mask field of the inotify_event structure returned when read(2)ing an ino‐
        tify file descriptor are both bit masks identifying inotify events.  The following bits can  be  specified  in  mask  when
        calling inotify_add_watch(2) and may be returned in the mask field returned by read(2):
    
            IN_ACCESS         File was accessed (read) (*).
            IN_ATTRIB         Metadata  changed,  e.g.,  permissions,  timestamps,  extended  attributes,  link count (since Linux
                              2.6.25), UID, GID, etc. (*).
            IN_CLOSE_WRITE    File opened for writing was closed (*).
            IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE  File not opened for writing was closed (*).
            IN_CREATE         File/directory created in watched directory (*).
            IN_DELETE         File/directory deleted from watched directory (*).
            IN_DELETE_SELF    Watched file/directory was itself deleted.
            IN_MODIFY         File was modified (*).
            IN_MOVE_SELF      Watched file/directory was itself moved.
            IN_MOVED_FROM     File moved out of watched directory (*).
            IN_MOVED_TO       File moved into watched directory (*).
            IN_OPEN           File was opened (*).
    
        When monitoring a directory, the events marked with an asterisk (*) above can occur for files in the directory,  in  which
        case the name field in the returned inotify_event structure identifies the name of the file within the directory.
    
        The  IN_ALL_EVENTS macro is defined as a bit mask of all of the above events.  This macro can be used as the mask argument
        when calling inotify_add_watch(2).
    
        Two additional convenience macros are IN_MOVE, which equates to IN_MOVED_FROM|IN_MOVED_TO, and IN_CLOSE, which equates  to
        IN_CLOSE_WRITE|IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE.
    
        The following further bits can be specified in mask when calling inotify_add_watch(2):
    
            IN_DONT_FOLLOW (since Linux 2.6.15)
                              Don't dereference pathname if it is a symbolic link.
            IN_EXCL_UNLINK (since Linux 2.6.36)
                              By  default,  when watching events on the children of a directory, events are generated for children
                              even after they have been unlinked from the directory.  This can result in large numbers of uninter‐
                              esting  events for some applications (e.g., if watching /tmp, in which many applications create tem‐
                              porary files whose names are immediately unlinked).  Specifying IN_EXCL_UNLINK changes  the  default
                              behavior,  so  that  events  are  not  generated for children after they have been unlinked from the
                              watched directory.
            IN_MASK_ADD       Add (OR) events to watch mask for this pathname if it already exists (instead of replacing mask).
            IN_ONESHOT        Monitor pathname for one event, then remove from watch list.
            IN_ONLYDIR (since Linux 2.6.15)
                              Only watch pathname if it is a directory.
    
        The following bits may be set in the mask field returned by read(2):
    
            IN_IGNORED        Watch was removed explicitly (inotify_rm_watch(2)) or automatically (file was deleted, or file  sys‐
                              tem was unmounted).
            IN_ISDIR          Subject of this event is a directory.
            IN_Q_OVERFLOW     Event queue overflowed (wd is -1 for this event).
            IN_UNMOUNT        File system containing watched object was unmounted.
 
&emsp;&emsp;
在 man 7 inotify 里给出了涉及到的内核参数：

    /proc interfaces
        The following interfaces can be used to limit the amount of kernel memory consumed by inotify:
    
        /proc/sys/fs/inotify/max_queued_events
               The  value  in  this  file is used when an application calls inotify_init(2) to set an upper limit on the number of
               events that can be queued to the corresponding inotify instance.  Events in excess of this limit are  dropped,  but
               an IN_Q_OVERFLOW event is always generated.
    
        /proc/sys/fs/inotify/max_user_instances
               This specifies an upper limit on the number of inotify instances that can be created per real user ID.
    
        /proc/sys/fs/inotify/max_user_watches
               This specifies an upper limit on the number of watches that can be created per real user ID.

&emsp;&emsp;
限制了创建的 instance 个数已经 watch 的数目，以及 event 的数目。
如果 event 出现溢出，就会产生 IN\_Q\_OVERFLOW 事件。
通常如果出现 overflow 事件意味着监控事件发生丢失，那么应用程序需要主动进行扫描。