# 13.3.2 poll/ppoll
***

    #include <poll.h>
    /* Type used for the number of file descriptors.  */
    typedef unsigned long int nfds_t;
    
    /* Data structure describing a polling request.  */
    struct pollfd {
        int fd;                     /* File descriptor to poll.  */
        short int events;           /* Types of events poller cares about.  */
        short int revents;          /* Types of events that actually occurred.  */
    };
    
    /* Poll the file descriptors described by the NFDS structures starting at
       FDS.  If TIMEOUT is nonzero and not -1, allow TIMEOUT milliseconds for
       an event to occur; if TIMEOUT is -1, block until an event occurs.
       Returns the number of file descriptors with events, zero if timed out,
       or -1 for errors.
    
       This function is a cancellation point and therefore not marked with
       __THROW.  */
    extern int poll (struct pollfd *__fds, nfds_t __nfds, int __timeout);
    
    #ifdef __USE_GNU
    /* Like poll, but before waiting the threads signal mask is replaced
       with that specified in the fourth parameter.  For better usability,
       the timeout value is specified using a TIMESPEC object.
    
       This function is a cancellation point and therefore not marked with
       __THROW.  */
    extern int ppoll (struct pollfd *__fds, nfds_t __nfds,
                      __const struct timespec *__timeout,
                      __const __sigset_t *__ss);

&emsp;&emsp;和 select/pselect 一样，pool 提供了接口。
其中 nfds 表示 fds 数组数量。
timeout 在这里单位是微秒。
和 select/pselect 最大的不同是，返回之后并不会修改 fds 里 fd 和 events 字段内容，产生的事件直接写在 revent 字段里。
可以看看 poll 支持的事件有哪些：

|标识名|events|revents|说明|
| --- | :---: | :---: | --- |
|POLLIN|Y|Y|可以不阻塞地读取出高优先级之外的数据 (等效于 PLLRDNORM & POLLRDBAND)|
|POLLRDNORM|Y|Y|不阻塞地读取普通数据 (优先级为 0 波段数据)|
|POLLRDBAND|Y|Y|不阻塞地读取非 0 优先级波段数据|
|POLLPRI|Y|Y|不阻塞地读取高优先级数据|
|POLLOUT|Y|Y|不阻塞地写普通数据|
|POLLWRNORM|Y|Y|和 POLLOUT 相同|
|POLLWRBAND|Y|Y|不阻塞地写非 0 优先级波段数据|
|POLLERR|-|Y|已经出错|
|POLLHUP|-|Y|已经挂断|
|POLLNVAL|-|Y|描述符无效|