# linux aio
***

&emsp;&emsp;
linux aio 的 API 包括下面这些：

    // #include <libaio.h>
    io_setup        // create aio context
    io_submit       // submit aio task
    io_getevents    // poll aio completion
    io_destroy      // destroy aio context
    io_cancel       // cancel aio task

&emsp;&emsp;
这个 API 接口只能够用于 disk IO 而不能够用于 network IO。

    int io_setup(unsigned nr_events, aio_context_t *ctxp);
    int io_destroy(aio_context_t ctx);

&emsp;&emsp;
创建和销毁 aio context 非常简单无须多言。

    int io_submit(aio_context_t ctx_id, long nr, struct iocb **iocbpp);

&emsp;&emsp;
可以看到可以提交多个 task。
具体每个 task 都是通过 struct iocb 来指定的。
这个结构可以在 /usr/include/linux/aio_abi.h 里找到。

    /* include/linux/aio_abi.h
     *
     * Copyright 2000,2001,2002 Red Hat.
     *
     * Written by Benjamin LaHaise <bcrl@kvack.org>
     *
     * Distribute under the terms of the GPLv2 (see ../../COPYING) or under 
     * the following terms.
     *
     * Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
     * documentation is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright
     * notice appears in all copies.  This software is provided without any
     * warranty, express or implied.  Red Hat makes no representations about
     * the suitability of this software for any purpose.
     *
     * IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT,
     * SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF
     * THIS SOFTWARE AND ITS DOCUMENTATION, EVEN IF RED HAT HAS BEEN ADVISED
     * OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
     *
     * RED HAT DISCLAIMS ANY WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
     * IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
     * PURPOSE.  THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, AND
     * RED HAT HAS NO OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES,
     * ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.
     */
    #ifndef __LINUX__AIO_ABI_H
    #define __LINUX__AIO_ABI_H
    
    #include <linux/types.h>
    #include <asm/byteorder.h>
    
    typedef unsigned long   aio_context_t;
    
    enum {
        IOCB_CMD_PREAD = 0,
        IOCB_CMD_PWRITE = 1,
        IOCB_CMD_FSYNC = 2,
        IOCB_CMD_FDSYNC = 3,
        /* These two are experimental.
         * IOCB_CMD_PREADX = 4,
         * IOCB_CMD_POLL = 5,
         */
        IOCB_CMD_NOOP = 6,
        IOCB_CMD_PREADV = 7,
        IOCB_CMD_PWRITEV = 8,
    };
    
    /*
     * Valid flags for the "aio_flags" member of the "struct iocb".
     *
     * IOCB_FLAG_RESFD - Set if the "aio_resfd" member of the "struct iocb"
     *                   is valid.
     */
    #define IOCB_FLAG_RESFD         (1 << 0)
    
    /* read() from /dev/aio returns these structures. */
    struct io_event {
        __u64           data;           /* the data field from the iocb */
        __u64           obj;            /* what iocb this event came from */
        __s64           res;            /* result code for this event */
        __s64           res2;           /* secondary result */
    };
    
    #if defined(__LITTLE_ENDIAN)
    #define PADDED(x,y)     x, y
    #elif defined(__BIG_ENDIAN)
    #define PADDED(x,y)     y, x
    #else
    #error edit for your odd byteorder.
    #endif
    
    /*
     * we always use a 64bit off_t when communicating
     * with userland.  its up to libraries to do the
     * proper padding and aio_error abstraction
     */
    
    struct iocb {
        /* these are internal to the kernel/libc. */
        __u64   aio_data;       /* data to be returned in event's data */
        __u32   PADDED(aio_key, aio_reserved1);
                                /* the kernel sets aio_key to the req # */

        /* common fields */
        __u16   aio_lio_opcode; /* see IOCB_CMD_ above */
        __s16   aio_reqprio;
        __u32   aio_fildes; // 文件fd

        __u64   aio_buf; // buffer地址
        __u64   aio_nbytes; // 字节数 
        __s64   aio_offset; // 偏移

        /* extra parameters */
        __u64   aio_reserved2;  /* TODO: use this for a (struct sigevent *) */

        /* flags for the "struct iocb" */
        __u32   aio_flags;

        /*
         * if the IOCB_FLAG_RESFD flag of "aio_flags" is set, this is an
         * eventfd to signal AIO readiness to
         */
        __u32   aio_resfd; // 如果设置 RESFD 标记，那么当完成这个操作也会通知这个 fd。
    }; /* 64 bytes */
    
    #undef IFBIG
    #undef IFLITTLE
    
    #endif /* __LINUX__AIO_ABI_H */

&emsp;&emsp;
最常用的大概就是 pread 和 pwrite 操作。

&emsp;&emsp;
发起之后可以有两种方式得到通知：使用 RESFD 或 io\_getevents。
主要看第二种方式，看看 API：

    int io_getevents(aio_context_t ctx_id, long min_nr, long nr,
                     struct io_event *events, struct timespec *timeout);
    int io_cancel(aio_context_t ctx_id, struct iocb *iocb,
                     struct io_event *result);
                 
&emsp;&emsp;
可以看到非常类似 epoll 的返回，返回接口是 io\_event (在上面有说明，各个字段含义也很明确)。

&emsp;&emsp;
相关文章：[io_setup(2) - Linux manual page](http://www.kernel.org/doc/man-pages/online/pages/man2/io_setup.2.html)